Steve Kerr Names Stephen Curry as the NBA GOAT Ahead of LeBron James and Michael Jordan

Golden State Warriors head coach Steve Kerr and NBA legend Shaquille O'Neal name Stephen Curry the greatest basketball player in terms of skills. Both highlight Curry's significant impact on the game, advocating for his inclusion in the all-time greatest players' conversation.

Stephen Curry (via Getty Images) Stephen Curry is no doubt one of the biggest names in the world of basketball. For the Golden State Warriors fans, and the team alike, especially head coach Steve Kerr, he is the very best in the business. And with backing from another NBA legend, namely Shaquille O'Neal, Kerr does not hesitate to name Steph Curry as the GOAT of the game when it comes to skills. Steve Kerr agrees with Shaquille O'Neal on the GOAT debate

Stephen Curry could probably be named as the player who has single-handedly won multiple matches for the Golden State Warriors. His performance over the many years that he has been with the team is more than praiseworthy, he is their biggest star. So it's not a surprise when Steve Kerr, the head coach of GSW, named Curry as the best basketball player when it comes to skills.

“It’s different; the way he impacts the game is different. When you have these conversations about ‘Who’s the greatest ever?’ you automatically go to these genetic marvels; you know, LeBron and Michael Jordan and Wilt Chamberlain and whoever else. Steph doesn’t fit that normal mold. I love that Shaq is bringing that up because, from a skills standpoint, it’s not even close. [Curry] is the greatest ever from a skills standpoint.”Curry has the same number of rings as LeBron James, one of the greats of the game, in fewer years on the court. The way he changed the way of the game is probably why his name is revered in the game so much. Anyone who loves basketball cannot deny the impact Curry has had on the game, and that's why Kerr and Shaq are so confident in their statement about the player.Shaquille O'Neal thinks we should start putting Stephen Curry in the GOAT debate

The conversation about Curry's GOAT status started after another great of the game - the Big Man Shaq, speaking on NBA on TNT, said that it's time Stephen Curry gets the credit he deserves for what he has done for the game. “I played against Mike, played with Kobe, played against and with LeBron. They’re all great… But at some point, we’re going to have to put Steph Curry in that category… I ain’t never seen nothing like that before, and nobody has. And how many [rings] he got? One, two, three, four, against LeBron. I demand that people start putting my guy in that conversation, period.” Both Curry and James have four NBA championships. Neither have been able to surpass Jordan on that aspect, who has 6 in his career. But with the way Curry is playing currently, he deserves the respect from fans indeed.

